This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy. (May 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "High-voltage transformer fire barriers" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (May 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) High-voltage transformers with bushings on top, separated by a fire barrier High-voltage transformer fire barriers, or transformer firewalls, transformer ballistic firewalls, transformer blast walls, are outdoor countermeasures against cascading failures in a national electric grid. The purpose of these barriers, like common fire barriers in building construction, is compartmentalisation of transformer fires, as well as transformer and bushing explosions where the fuel source of both fires and explosions is the transformer oil. Without compartmentalisation, one ruptured transformer could start its neighbouring transformer on fire and thus create a domino effect that can affect the surrounding electric grid, particularly during peak times. High-voltage transformer fire barriers are typically located in electrical substations, but may also be attached to buildings, such as valve halls or manufacturing plants with large electrical distribution systems, such as pulp and paper mills. Outdoor transformer fire barriers that are attached at least on one side to a building are referred to as wing walls. At times, high-voltage transformers can be located immediately outside and sometimes inside of buildings, requiring higher fire-resistance ratings[1] than other fire compartments in a building. Contents 1 Voluntary recommendations by NFPA 850 2 Alternatives or enhancements to transformer fire barriers 2.1 Spatial separation 2.2 Automatic fire suppression systems 2.3 Alternatives to mineral-based transformer oil 2.4 Automatic transformer and bushing monitoring and instrumentation 3 See also 4 References Voluntary recommendations by NFPA 850[edit] The primary North American document that deals with outdoor high-voltage transformer fire barriers is NFPA 850[2]. NFPA 850 outlines that outdoor oil-insulated transformers should be separated from adjacent structures and from each other by firewalls, spatial separation, or other approved means for the purpose of limiting the damage and potential spread of fire from a transformer failure. Alternatives or enhancements to transformer fire barriers[edit] The following may be used in place of or in addition to transformer fire barriers, depending on the design goals. They are not necessarily, however, compensatory measures against ballistic attacks or other sabotage.[3] Spatial separation[edit] Transformers may be placed far enough apart, given available space, such that the rupture of one may not affect its neighbouring transformer(s).[citation needed] Automatic fire suppression systems[edit] Fire protection water spray systems are used to cool a transformer to prevent damage if exposed to radiation heat transfer from a fire involving oil released from another transformer that has failed.[4] Alternatives to mineral-based transformer oil[edit] Transformer oil is available in different levels of ignitability, including those approved by FM Global [5] FM Data Sheet 5-4 indicates different levels of protection depending on the type of fluid used. Alternatives include, but are not limited to, esters and silicone oil[6]. Automatic transformer and bushing monitoring and instrumentation[edit] Electronic measures by means of strategic instrumentation may be used to detect and prevent surges leading to fires.[citation needed] See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to High-voltage transformer fire barriers. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Asymmetrical fire barriers. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Time/Temperature Curves. Arc fault Cascading failure Countermeasure Critical infrastructure protection Electric grid Electric grid security Electrical power distribution Fire test Firewall (construction) North American Electric Reliability Corporation Passive fire protection Transformer References[edit] ^ Ecmweb.com article entitled "Article 450: Transformers and Transformer Vaults" by Mike Holt, dated 01. May 2008, Search for "Vault construction" Paragraph ^ NFPA 850 Recommended Practice for Fire Protection for Electric Generating Plants and High-Voltage Direct Current Converter Stations ^ FM Global Data Sheet 5-4 Transformers ^ FM Global Data Sheet 5-4 Transformers https://www.fmglobal.com/research-and-resources/fm-global-data-sheets ^ Transformers and transformer fluids ^ Globecore.com article entitled “Comparison of silicone oil and mineral oil transformers”